Source: Gaver_1993_WhatInTheWorldDoWeHear.pdf
First 2000 words extracted
================================================================================

What in the World Do We Hear? An Ecological Approach to Auditory Event Perception William W. Gaver Rank Xerox Cambridge EuroPARC 61 Regent Street, Cambridge, CB2 1AB, U.K. ABSTRACT Everyday listening is the experience of hearing events in the world rather than sounds per se. In this paper, I take an ecological approach to everyday listening in order to overcome constraints on its study implied by more traditional approaches. In particular, I am concerned with developing a new framework for describing sound in terms of audible source attributes. An examination of the continuum of structured energy from event to audition suggests that sound conveys information about events at locations in an environment. Qualitative descriptions of the physics of sound-producing events, complemented by protocol studies, suggest a tripartite division of sound-producing events into those involving vibrating solids, gasses, or liquids. Within each of these categories, basic level events are defined by the simple interactions that can cause these materials to sound, while more complex events can be described in terms of temporal patterning, compound, or hybrid sources. The results of these investigations are used to create a map of sound-producing events and their attributes useful in guiding further exploration. INTRODUCTION Imagine that you are walking along a road at night when you hear a sound. On the one hand, you might pay attention to its pitch and loudness and the ways they change with time. You might attend to the sound's timbre, whether it is rough or smooth, bright or dull. You might even notice that it masks other sounds, rendering them inaudible. These are all examples of musical listening , in which the perceptual dimensions and attributes of concern have to do with the sound itself, and are those used in the creation of music. These are the sorts of perceptual phenomena of concern to most traditional psychologists interested in sound and hearing. On the other hand, as you stand there in the road, it is likely that you will not listen to the sound itself at all. Instead, you are likely to notice that the sound is made by an automobile with a large and powerful engine. Your attention is likely to be drawn to the fact that it is approaching quickly from behind. And you might even attend to the environment, hearing that the road you are on is actually a narrow alley, with echoing walls on each side. This is an example of everyday listening, the experience of listening to events rather than sounds. Most of our experience of hearing the day-to-day world is one of everyday listening: we are concerned with listening to the things going on around us, with hearing which are important to avoid and which might offer possibilities for action. The perceptual dimensions and attributes of concern correspond to those of the sound-producing event and its environment, not to those of the sound itself. This sort of experience seems qualitatively different from musical listening, and is not well understood by traditional approaches to audition. The distinction between everyday and musical listening is between experiences, not sounds (nor even psychological approaches). It is possible to listen to any sound either in terms of its attributes or in terms of those of the event that caused it. For instance, while listening to a string quartet we might be concerned with the patterns of sensation the sounds evoke (musical listening), or we might listen to the characteristics and identities of the instruments themselves (everyday listening). Conversely, while walking down a city street we are likely to listen to the sources of sounds – the size of an approaching car, how close it is and how quickly it is approaching – but occasionally we might listen to the world as we do music – to the humming pitch of a ventilator punctuated by a syncopated birdcall, to the Gaver, W. W. (1993). What in the world do we hear? An ecological approach to auditory source perception. Ecological Psychology, 5 (1): 1-29. Copyright © 1993. Please do not modify this paper, nor circulate it without appropriate citation information. Comments to w.gaver@rca.ac.uk. 

Gaver: What in the world do we hear? 2 interplay and harmony of the sounds around us. This may seem an unusual experience, but hearing the everyday world as music is one way to understand what John Cage, for instance, is attempting in his compositions. In presenting traffic sounds, for example, in a concert setting, he is trying to evoke an experience of musical listening to non-musical sounds (see Cage, 1976). The Psychology of Everyday Listening The experience of everyday listening may serve as the foundation for a new explanatory framework for understanding sound and listening. Such a framework would allow us to understand listening and manipulate sounds along dimensions of sources rather than sounds. So for example, we might imagine a psychoacoustics concerned with measuring people’s ability to hear the forces involved in events, or a synthesiser that allowed us to specify whether a sound source was wood or metal. Such an account would complement the one offered by traditional psychoacoustics. Clearly the phenomena studied in traditional psychoacoustics are valid whether a person is engaged in everyday or musical listening: A loud sound will mask a soft one, whether I am concerned with the soft one having a certain pitch or with the size of its source. But a new framework may alter some of the questions about sound and hearing we consider important. It certainly should allow us to refer more directly to attributes of everyday listening than does our present understanding of psychoacoustics. For despite centuries of study of sound and hearing, we do not really know how it is, for instance, that a listener can hear that a sound is made by a large and powerful automobile approaching in a narrow alley, or can tell that somebody is ascending or descending a staircase from the sounds made. Laboratory studies concerning pitch perception, loudness, and so forth are as distant from these sorts of question as studies of peoples' perception of letter shape and spacing would be from understanding reading comprehension. Although research on audition has included topics relevant for everyday listening – most notably localisation and timbre perception – we still know little about how to characterise the fundamental attributes of events that we hear, or about the acoustic cues that inform us about these events and their attributes. Why Is So Little Known About Everyday Listening? There are two reasons for our ignorance, one historical and the other theoretical. Historically, studies of acoustics and psychoacoustics have been guided largely by a concern with understanding music and the sounds produced by musical instruments. From the ancient Greeks’ discovery that doubling the length of a vibrating string lowers its pitch by an octave, through to Helmholtz’ (1885/1954) studies of the harmonic structure of musical sounds, and even to present day studies of computer music (e.g., Pierce, 1983), the major thrust of disciplines concerned with nonspeech audio has been to use musical sounds and to understand musical listening. But an account of hearing based on the sounds and perceptions of musical instruments often seems biased and difficult to generalise. Musical sounds are not representative of the range of sounds we normally hear. Most musical sounds are harmonic; most everyday sound inharmonic or noisy. Musical sounds tend to have a smooth, relatively simple temporal evolution; everyday sounds tend to be much more complex. Musical sounds seem to reveal little about their sources; while everyday sounds often provide a great deal of information about theirs. Finally, musical instruments afford changes of the sounds they make along relatively uninformative dimensions such as pitch or loudness, while everyday events involve many more kinds of changes – changes that are often musically useless but pragmatically important. Our current knowledge about sound and hearing has been deeply influenced by the study of a rather idiosyncratic subset of sounds and sources. Studies of audition have been further constrained by sensation-based theories of perception and the supposed primitives of sound they suggest. Physical descriptions of sound are dominated by those suggested by the Fourier transform: frequency, amplitude, phase, and duration. Traditional explanations of psychophysics take these “primitive” physical dimensions as their elemental stimuli and use them to motivate the identification of corresponding “elemental” sensations. From this perspective, more complex perceptions must depend on the integration of elemental sensations – but often, sensations seem inadequate to specify complex events. Thus traditional approaches argue that there is often a paucity of information in available stimuli, and that veridical perception must depend on representations of the world based largely on memory, “unconscious inference” or problem-solving. The upshot of this approach is a strategy preoccupied with elemental sensations, while questions concerning auditory event perception – if recognised at all – are left to higher-level cognitive accounts. But because students of cognition are often more interested in general questions of mechanisms and representations than in the content of cognition, focused examinations of everyday listening often fall between the cracks separating psychoacoustics and cognition. 

Gaver: What in the world do we hear? 3 The Ecological Approach To Perception In order to understand everyday listening, it is necessary to broaden the range of physical parameters and perceptual experiences to be considered. For instance, we might add new perceptual dimensions such as size or force to those considered by psychoacoustics, and study them in terms of their acoustic correlates. Such an endeavour implies that traditional psychoacoustics needs to be stretched in two ways: First, the perceptual dimensions we need to study concern those of sources as well as sounds, and second, we must be willing to treat apparently complex acoustic variables as elemental. This approach is inspired and guided by the ecological approach to vision developed by Gibson (1979/1986, 1966). The ecological perspective counters many of the assumptions of traditional accounts of perception. According to the ecological approach, perception is usually of complex events and entities in the everyday world. Moreover, it is direct, unmediated by inference or memory. Elemental stimuli for perception do not necessarily correspond to primitive physical dimensions but may instead be specified by complex invariants of supposedly primitive features. Thus complex perceptions rely on seemingly complex stimuli (or “perceptual information”), not on the integration of sensations. From this point of view, there is rich and varied information in the world, both because our descriptions are no longer limited to primitive physical dimensions and because exploration of the world over time – as opposed to passive exposure to discrete stimuli – becomes an important component of perception. Thus, according to the ecological account, the study of perception should be aimed at uncovering ecologically relevant dimensions of perception and the invariant perceptual information for them. Developing An Ecological Account Of Listening There has been little development of an ecological account of audition as yet. Gibson (1966) did make some preliminary observations about listening, but did not develop them to a great degree. More recently, there have been several studies of listening based on the ecological perspective (e.g., Heine & Guski, 1991a, 1991b; Shaw et al., 1991; Gaver, 1988; Warren & Verbrugge, 1984; Vanderveer, 1979); these will be discussed throughout this paper and its companion (Gaver, in preparation). Such studies have proven informative on their own and lend support to the idea that an ecological approach to audition might be fruitful, but a comprehensive account of everyday listening has yet to emerge. There is little in the way of an organising theoretical framework that allows the relations among various research results to be understood, or that guides the formulation of new questions. What might such a framework look like? It must answer two simple but fundamental questions. First, in expanding upon traditional accounts of elemental sensations, we must develop an account of ecologically relevant perceptual entities: the dimensions and features of events that we actually obtain through listening. Thus our first question is What do we hear? Similarly, in expanding traditional accounts of the primitive physical features of sound, we 