Source: Katz_2025_BuffaloModelRetrospective.pdf
First 2000 words extracted
================================================================================

18 | AUDIOLOGY TODAY Jan/Feb 2025 Vol 37 No 1 BY JACK KATZ The Buffalo Model—a comprehensive approach to evaluate and remediate auditory processing disorders—was first introduced nearly 40 years ago. Developed by Dr. Jack Katz, it is based on the results of a three-test battery: the Phonemic Synthesis Test, the Staggered Spondaic Word test, and the Speech-in-Noise test. Read on to learn how this model came to be. How Buffalo ModelTheThe Came Came to Beto Be 

19Vol 37 No 1 Jan/Feb 2025 AUDIOLOGY TODAY | 

| AUDIOLOGY TODAY Jan/Feb 2025 Vol 37 No 1 20 How the Buffalo Model Came to Be T he Buffalo Model started, unknowingly, in 1958 when I developed the Phonemic Synthesis Test (PST) while working at three central schools. The next major element was conceptualized in 1960 when I was bottle-feeding my son at mid - night. The Staggered Spondaic Word (SSW) test is a procedure used to identify prob - lems from the cochlea up to the auditory reception center of the brain and beyond and is the basis for the four categories of the auditory processing disorder (APD). The third Buffalo Model procedure—the Words- in-Noise Test—was developed in the late 1960s when the first few children whom I saw for APD also had speech-in-noise issues. When I started teaching at the University at Buffalo in 1974, I revised the speech-in- noise procedure. These three basic tests of the Buffalo Model are widely used in the United States and other English-speaking countries. They, as well as other tests and therapy procedures, have been adapted into many languages around the world and used in many countries (Kedar and Katz, 1976; Soto Ramos et al, 1992; Wilson et al, 2007; Negin et al, 2020; Irani et al, 2022). When I was a master of science student at Syracuse University, Dr. Louis DiCarlo told us, “If the person you are working with has a problem, it is your job to figure out how to help them!” Consequently, when I developed each of the tests, the next thing I did was to develop a procedure to improve that problem. The PST, Words-in-Noise Test, and Dichotic Offset Training programs all immediately showed positive results and are still used effectively today (Emanuel et al, 2011). STEP 01 The Phonemic Synthesis Test One day at Syracuse University in 1957, Dr. Charles Mange was giving a lecture when he suddenly stopped and said, “You know, there is a skill with which children with articulation problems and children with reading problems have difficulty.” I was baffled. In those days, we thought that reading problems were visual and that artic - ulation problems were mouth and tongue muscle problems. How could both of those groups have trouble with his test? I did not listen to the rest of his lecture and right after class dashed to his office to find out what he was referring to. He told me about his Phonetic Synthesis Test, with altered speech sounds of words that he made with his fancy equipment. It was very interesting but way over my head. A few months later, after I finished my master of science degree, I took a job as a speech and hearing therapist. When I learned that I had 17 students with articu - lation problems, I thought that it would be interesting to give them a test similar to the one used by Dr. Mange. I could not possibly duplicate his test, but I thought I could give them one sound at a time and see if they could give me the word. That night, I recorded my 15-item test and later tested those children. Sixteen of them had awful scores, but one had no problem at all. She had an interdental /s/ problem. I did not realize why at the time, but she had a motor problem and not APD. I then asked the reading therapist if she would 

Vol 37 No 1 Jan/Feb 2025 AUDIOLOGY TODAY | 21 How the Buffalo Model Came to Be test those 16 children. When she looked at my list, she said, “I do not have to test them; they are my children, too.” Wow, Dr. Mange was right—articulation and reading! I then had to follow Dr. DiCarlo’s directive to figure out how to help the children. I had no clue what the problem was, so the only thing I could think of doing was to turn the test around and make it into a therapy. I was amazed how quickly they caught on and improved their articu - lation skills. Once I did that, I had a brilliant thought: If some young children had this prob - lem, I could give all the children in a class training and help all of them. I did that for the first-grade class for the rest of the semester and then told the teacher that I would be working with kindergartners the next semester. She replied in a sad voice, “You mean you are not going to work with my children anymore?” I said, surprisingly, “No, why do you ask?” She said, “Oh, it has been so helpful to the children!” She began to tell me all the ways the children improved, but I was so dumb - founded—I did not listen to or remember what she said. The next semester, I left the job early to start my PhD program and never found out how it worked for the kindergartners, but I am sure the training was beneficial. I started my PhD program primarily working in speech-lan - guage pathology, but when I was nearly laughed out of the department because I wanted to study the PST for my disserta - tion, I switched to audiology to work with Dr. Aubrey Epstein. My dissertation introduced me to the effects of otitis media on auditory skills. This led me to another road that eventually hooked up to phonemic training and the effects of otitis media on auditory processing (Katz et al, 2012). The research formed the basis of the Buffalo Model for APD using multidimensional scoring, which was not used in audiology at the time. 

| AUDIOLOGY TODAY Jan/Feb 2025 Vol 37 No 1 22 How the Buffalo Model Came to Be STEP 02 The Staggered Spondaic Word Test After I thought up the SSW test, I could not wait to get my PhD and start teaching. I taught at Northern Illinois University. After the first semester, a group of students asked me to supervise their master’s theses. I assigned three of them to work on the SSW test ( FIGURE 1 ). This was before there was such a thing as APD; we were working to locate temporal lobe tumors. I assigned one student to study adults with hearing loss because my orig - inal purpose was to make a central test that would work despite peripheral hearing loss. A second student evaluated older adult patients (I must have been somewhat ahead of my time, as the article we submitted for publication was denied because they said that older people did not have central prob - lems). Because we had no medical faculty or support, our temporal lobe brain lesion group had to meet certain criteria: a history of skull trauma resulting in unconscious - ness and also a temporal region scar and paralysis on the opposite side. Each of the students also contributed to gathering the control group data (Katz et al, 1963). The results were significant for each group. The peripheral hearing loss findings were very interesting. Those with cochlear hearing losses did not have the normal results I had hoped for, but their SSW and word recognition score errors (W-22 words) 10:00 am–4:00 pm New Orleans, LA AT AAA 2025+H earTECH Expo MARCH 26 Surround yourself with peers, experts, and changemakers. Register Now! VISIT www.StudentAcademyofAudiology.orgSPONSORED BY TAKE YOUR SEAT! 

Vol 37 No 1 Jan/Feb 2025 AUDIOLOGY TODAY | 23 How the Buffalo Model Came to Be were almost identical. This find - ing eventually led to a correction factor for patients with cochlear and other hearing losses (Katz, 1962). In 1963, I was teaching at Tulane Medical School. I applied for a National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant to see if the SSW test could identify temporal lobe tumors. Site visitors from NIH came to visit. One of them took me aside and told me that my test was looking only at tem - poral lobe tumors when it could be much broader. He stated that I would not get the grant, but I should look at broader aspects, and I probably would get it next time. How great was that? The next semester, I reapplied and received the three-year NIH grant. I also had both neurolo - gists and ear, nose, and throat physicians collaborate on the study. We found that temporal lobe cases had very poor total scores, but especially in one of the two competing conditions ( FIGURE 1 ), which indicated Heschl’s gyrus involvement on the opposite side. We also found that anterior region lesions were associated with other signs on the test. This research eventually pro - vided the loci of more than 20 SSW regional signs and later the associated academic and communication problems. This further provided understand - ing of 20 more signs on the other two tests (Katz, 1962). The research formed the basis of the Buffalo Model for APD using multidimensional scoring, which was not used in audiology at the time. Multidimensional scoring looks for more than one diagnos - tic indicator on a test. It provides backup support and expanded diagnostic information. I was very comfortable with this type of scoring because my mother taught me that “it is a sin to waste.” This test was able to provide multiple indicators of central auditory disfunction, and each of the three tests in the Buffalo Model obey my mother’s directive. R-NC R-C Right Ear Up Stairs Left Ear Down Town L-C L-NC L-NC L-C Left Ear Out Side Right Ear In Law R-C R-NC FIGURE 1. Two Staggered Spondaic Word test items showing the noncompeting (NC) and competing (C) words for both ears. Items alternate starting in the right (R) and left (L) ears to provide both challenges. 

| AUDIOLOGY TODAY Jan/Feb 2025 Vol 37 No 1 24 How the Buffalo Model Came to Be STEP 03 The Words-in- Noise Test When APD came on the scene, most of the children or their families also indicated problems in noise. I had no test for speech-in-noise, and, based on these complaints, I developed a Speech-in-Noise test in our apartment, where my children and wife would be talking and using dishes and pots to make other noises. This was okay, but when I started teaching at the University of Buffalo, the univer - sity had another procedure using W-22 words and white noise. Before long, I developed a com - promise between the two tests. I had four male speakers on one side of the table, farther from the microphone, and four female speakers on the other side. Each person had a different book they were to read out loud for 10–15 minutes. I found a 3-minute sec - tion at a consistent noise level and played it over and over for the competing noise. We were, then, able to use W-22 words on one track and the multitalker noise on the other. STEP 04 Norms I asked colleagues who were experienced in using these tests to assist me in gathering the normative data. These colleagues were from across the country and Canada, and each was asked to test about 10 people, aged 5–60 years. They were to have normal hearing and no history of speech or reading therapy or academic difficulties. When we calculated the test results, subjects with scores greater than two stan - dard deviations below the mean were removed from the sample, FIGURE 2. The four categories of test results. SOURCES: Katz, 1962, 1992. Decoding Quickly and 